[static]
Part of this comes from
that great feeling of warmth, devotional, and hospitality, that sense that if we're coming to Worcester for the first time, we are returning to a place we hold up.
I think part of that comes from finding here again old friends, like Father Dean, because he doesn't sit here, who will engage with Demetri Pastino's daughter.
and new friends that I know will become over a period of time.
Friends, I have this world.
In a thrilled way, this is the feeling we have as I move across this country through the name of their issues.
That sense of caring, of meaning, of one place to come.
What do you say you are a noted writer?
Is it not always this way?
Do you not enter a town, an earthly town, meet before a club, seated, acclaimed, recognized?
There are times when the enthusiasm of a person in which you meet exceeds their literary accuracy.
As with a woman, program chairman of a woman club in Minnesota, with zeal as Patrice, the world were not the author of Portland.
That was obviously not the part, but an eminently free
But no, it isn't always that way.
I remember through the years of lecturing a whole series of tall college towns coming in late and inviting you to a dreary bus terminal or railroad station being picked up by an associate instructor in the English department.
Driven to the only hotel in town, a grim, forbidding-looking character that resembled the story by Edgar Allan Poe.
Taking into the lobby, which has the musty smell of our food, withered palms beside the registration desk.
Out to my room, where, if it is winter, steam kisses in the rusted rain.
I would sleep that night in the bed of a mattress that I would sleep.
That reasonable reason.
In the morning would rise to shade before a band of ear that was always trapped in my face to meet the contortions of the glass.
The different aspects of my nature made my thoughts.
The noun of the pleasantest part of the day was assembly or the convocation, the chance to meet with students, afterwards before departure for the next student at the college town, lunch with selected members of the English department.
Most of whom were amiable and friendly, and the few who were hostile because they had written novels, they thought were better than anything I had done.
But they could not get the publication.
I am, with all the grand introductions of this literary, a story.
It is an old and terribly honorable tradition.
We used to have, in a way, a claim to make all the story-telling, an old blind quote by the people who told some good stories.
I remember the great flapping of arms before the ramparts of Troy that morning.
I remember the old memories that are armed.
Now, how does the story-teller begin?
It does not begin much differently than all of us.
We also learn that the activities of the memories are less important than the emotion which the memories generate.
The fine novelist Wright Morris had a memory of gathering with a group of his friends under the back porch of a house where he grew up.
Years later, as a result, he returned to that house and was astounding to find there wasn't room under the back porch for anything more than an assembly of cats.
How could he remember, he thought so clearly, those friends gathered under that porch?
I suspect that what he remembered was the warmth, the emotion of that gathering.
And that replaced the accuracy of the
My father was a Greek Orthodox.
We grew up on the south side of Shippon.
We lived, 10 of us, in our family, in buildings always in general proximity to my father's church.
Some of you raised in an environment like that.
You'll remember that.
were two-story or three-story buildings, very narrow, separated by very narrow gang waves where the earth was dead and dark because it never felt the light or warmth of the sun.
The buildings were all the same, designed by the same brooding architects, whose evolved aim was to eliminate as much light and warmth from these rooms as possible.
It was a sunflower room in front
Living room, long narrow corridor from which bedrooms and bathrooms ran off like cubicles in the ladder of the devils.
Dining room, kitchen, back of the kitchen, a small sun-parter room, where the windows never had to look any close, so the room was frigid winter.
How did I know that room was frigid winter?
I was one of the youngest in the family, and invariably those rooms were my domain.
I can remember waking on a winter morning.
You know how one tests the temperature of the air by exhaling before you emerge from beneath the cupboards?
I would breathe out into the cold air of the room, and if I asked you what I see, you would answer, I saw my breath.
Though this is an important part of all I will have to tell you.
A storyteller must not accept any experience as ordinary.
All experience is extraordinary because it is happening to us.
It is happening to that life within us, to that span of years within us.
There is no such thing as ordinary experience because each of us, in our own way, is extraordinary.
Therefore I would respond, I did not see my breath.
I saw the sphere of my breath congeal at once into a ball of ice and plummet to the floor.
But this room was a delight in spring, summer, and autumn.
I could open the windows, could call to my friends playing in the alley below.
They would call out to me.
I would go down and join them at their games, which must be the games you played as children and grandchildren play now.
It was high school.
Pick the can.
You must all remember, kick the can.
The goalkeeper tending the can, the idea to call out the name of any player here.
Tap the can, the player comes to jail.
Now as long as even one player remains free, who might get to that can and kick it, then all those already captured would go free.
So the more players captured in a game, the more nervous the goalkeeper becomes.
I remember one magnificent game of kick the can.
Nineteen of my freemates captured, I the only one still free.
How did I know I was the only one still free?
I could hear their beseeching voices calling to me across the backyard fences.
Harry, save us!
Save us!
I crept stealthily from yard to yard, hid for a moment behind a garbage can, shitting up a telephone pole to stand for a moment on the peak of a garage roof.
There they were, masked in the alley before me, the goldkeeper and his prisoners.
I stood up for a moment, balanced precariously like a Greek Superman.
and then leaped down into their starved mist to give the can a smashing, furious kick that sent it ricocheting and rolling down the alley.
I, teed of my claiming, cried out my name in jubilation.
The goalkeeper.
A good friend of mine who told that day was in such despair he sat down on the stole of the alley and cried.
You will say, please, it was, after all, simply the game that kicked the camera.
But I say to you, it was not the game that kicked the camera.
It was a moment of gilded and golden triumph I had been trying vainly in my life to match.
The twilight and the plaintive voices of the mothers falling across the gathering darkness.
Now we would scatter German, Polish, Irish, Jewish, Greek, going up to our own ethnic preserves,
Looking back, my mother's kitchen always warmed for me.
The sense of freshly baked bread.
Was she always baking?
No, she probably didn't bake more than once a month.
But we remember not that which happened.
I remember my mother's kitchen.
Warm, pretty big bread.
We'd have a slice of that bread with a little glass of red wine before going to bed.
Sometimes as a special treat, the great soup bowl.
When it had been boiled for broth, we'd scoop out the marrow.
When I say to a high school or a palet audience, narrow sandwiches, I would read it with a collective.
And I say to them, they are deprived.
Sunday morning, my father would wake me very early.
I would go with him to his church.
I remember the stillness of those mornings the two of us walking down 61st Street.
The first light of dawn flimmering across the top.
The Earth is suspended in that curious moment that we have in our grasp at the beginning of time.
That moment when the night begins to descend and the light can move stronger.
That moment that is precarious and dangerous because there is always that perhaps the darkness will remain strong.
The light will not gain a sense anymore.
I remember the stillness and our footsteps across the walls.
And I remember one particular morning now, more than forty-five years ago, when the only other occupant of the street beside my father and myself was a prowling town, turning to the point of the street, and I drowned.
Like I heard to this day, my father decided to excuse me that I had to say, I will expect exactly
As a brief reading, I'm going to read to you a memory of that period, a recollection I have of my childhood, and of the way in which I wrote it in here, and the way in which the writer introduces the element of nostalgia to warm and enjoy it.
If one traveled west from our neighborhood across Cottage Grove Avenue to the location of my father's church, the district was almost completely blocked.
Cottage Grove seen the dividing line.
It took us to the military school who taught English subjects from 9 to 1230, and after a break for lunch, it means grammar and history from 1 to 12.
Our teachers are both Greek and American, and achieve the common ethnic denominator by their reliance upon the stick.
I would get flat hands without someone getting walloped.
As a rule, the American teachers were struck without any great position.
One of the Greek teachers of the group of their Mediterranean background struck with passion and fur.
We had boys in our class who were continually practicing with the hold of the punishment.
There was once a classmate of mine who had threatened with a beating would sprint to a rear window, open it, and leap through a second before the outreach teacher reached him.
He was called a racist.
We had another boy called Trappier Cleveland the Howl.
At the first blow, whoever he liked, he would begin to howl and shriek in unremitting agony, rolling his eyes, clutching his head.
There was still another boy called the Duck.
As supple of the snake, he would twist and coil his body, neatly evading most of the violent flailings of the stick.
We watched the spouse with rapid admiration till the exhaustion came from, having pickled the land more than two or three bones out of thirst.
I own experience with the stick included a period when, for some reason, I was never struck with.
You never get hit, but there's a problem.
My classmates told me resentment.
However, there was another interminable period when I suffered the curse for the most trivial in life.
I was beaten every day.
You always get hit because your father's the priest, they explain it.
I brought the priest to my church and school.
It was a Roman Catholic church and parish school, a foreign country ruled by long, black-skirted, white-sized sisters, with the awesome capability to deliver bare-handed blows that equal the force of the ones struck by our teachers with sticks.
I once witnessed a boy pulled out of line by an irate sister who held him by the scrum in his jacket and then delivered a short beard and bow to his side.
He landed crumbled against the fence, apparently outpulled in the knockout Muhammad Ali with a bad hand.
Reflecting the neighborhood, most of the students in the Catholic school were black.
We came as interlopers from the white neighborhood across Cottage Grove.
Black and white, we were mortal enemies constantly at war.
Our assaults and forays against one another raged in curses and stone-throwing to full-scale battles with fists and sticks.
I cannot remember anyone getting killed, which was a wonder considering the number of broken teeth and bloody heads.
After such encounters, our teachers pulled us inside and beat us.
Much as the black boys were being beaten across the street, the punishment, as you can imagine, served only to intensify our fury.
There was a black boy I will never forget, tall and strong, although he was no more than fourteen, with the speed and body of a superb athlete who spread care among us.
Sighted, splashing eyes and grayed white teeth, bared in a scream of battle, struck us with panic.
One ignominious day, the infertile defense entered our playground, and a hundred of us, boys and girls caught in some mob hysteria, fled frantically for the protection of our school building.
The spectacle of that boy, although all, chasing a hundred to send support into the school,
remains with me to this day.
Where are they now, the boys I played with, the girls I walk beside?
Where are the young blacks we fought in the senseless, doable bigotry of our youth?
Where is the black Achilles who struck such terror in my heart?
Where are the racer, the holder, the dodger,
Do they still meet the assaults of life as they once met the attacks of angry teachers?
Where the storekeepers greeted us each morning as my sister and I walked proudly beside my father on our way to school?
I know where my father is.
He is dead now, lying great and still beneath the flowered patch of cemetery sun.
How many of the others must be dead as well, their sons and daughters scattered across the country and the world, remembering even as I remember now.
If I could, I would say to them, this is the way it was on those crisp mornings in autumn, when we stuffed our sneakers with the brown wrinkled leaves, those afternoons in early spring, the windows of our classrooms open to the scent of new buds, those twilights in the summer with the mothers calling plaintively as we crouched hidden in the shadows.
While we shared this kingdom of our childhood, lived there as sprinters and fools, first word of joy and sorrow, played against time and games we always won, felt no threat of age and death.
Because you see, then we thought the sun would remain young.
Memories and the nostalgia for the memories.
What's another important ingredient for storytelling?
That which characterizes men and women alone among the animals.
The quality of imagination.
Imagination, simply that capacity to structure something that might have happened, though it did not happen.
We Greeks, again, have both a blessing and a danger inherent in our great heritage.
We tend to believe, in fact, are convinced we are descended from the Gods, and this sometimes can have dreadful ramifications.
I speak of the development of my whole imagination, fed and nurtured by this heroic Greek background, so that on the earth we walk in epic strides.
I began my writing with a writing of poetry, quivering sonnets and ravishing refrains.
very dreadful verses, which my indulgent merits allowed me to read and guests assembled at my father's table on satyata.
When I had finished a pulver, the quality of the words burning my palms, I would carry it to my mother and say, let me read it to the guests.
She'd take me into the dining room and call the guests of my father to attention.
I would stand there reciting one of my verses.
Fortunately for you good people, I can only remember the opening lines of one of those early efforts which went something like this.
Here we all sit around the table, drinking wine from a bottle with a red label.
Our faces eager and our appetites bright as we're all sitting around pretty hungry under the light.
We have poets, good poets in this audience.
It almost shames me to have to confess that, but in the spirit of the talk, I will relay it.
But I was always greeted by enthusiastic applause.
It took me the reason, years to understand the reason for this intemperate and excessive applause, but simply, you see, the guests had either already eaten my mother's good food,
or were about-eated, and in either instance, what did it profit of them to be critics?
Now, the echoes of that contemporary applause lingered in my ears for years, further unbalancing an already unfortunate predilection for unbalancement my dead path from an early age.
By the time I reached the seventh grade of our parochial school, the school attached to my father's church,
I had been designated Storyteller Laureate of the 7th grade class.
Now what did this mean?
This meant simply once or twice a week.
When it came time for the reading of several small stories, my teacher with uncommon sensitivity retained my reading for last.
I used to secretly think of myself like the frosting on a cupcake.
The best for the end.
I can remember as I remember the triumph of Kick the Camp.
I can remember those days when I knew I was going to read.
I couldn't concentrate on my lessons all morning.
When my turn came, the class hushed in anticipation.
I would rise from my desk, which was in the last row of the room.
I would walk slowly to the front of the room, savoring the silence.
When I stood up beside the teacher's vest, the little sheaf of my manuscript in my hand, I would cast a look out across the audience, and finish by looking admirably at a dark-eyed, bare-legged little plump of a girl named Malcolm in the first row.
Oh, there was the loveliest girl in the room, and I and every other boy in the room admired her very much.
I read my manuscript.
When I finished the class burst into spontaneous and enthusiastic applause, I would stand up there lovingly applause, closing my eyes better to enjoy the rhythm of that slander, swaying slight
until my teacher nudged me for me to go back to my seat.
You know how you walk when you're trying to affect a demeanor of modesty?
I walked down the aisle slouching slightly, my eyes downcast, and yet one of them was smitten and baleful.
glaring at some lout in the corner who wasn't applauding with the rest.
I vowed I would improve his enthusiasm at recess.
At night, in the last few moments before going to sleep, I would recount, recapture the triumph of my day and think, what a marvelous thing the writer's life, approval, approbation, applause.
You see, although I was a Greek,
and even as a boy had read the Greek tragedies, I did not yet have wisdom enough to understand the gods punish humorous, the sin of arrogance, in Chicago as well as in thieves.
One day,
In this class, I forgot my lunch at home.
I forgot the little brown bag with my lunch at the dining room at home.
I went to classes.
The morning passed.
Lunchtime came.
My teacher, noticing I had more lunch, asked me where it was.
A simple question.
Harry, where's your lunch?
A simple question deserving a simple, truthful answer, as I am sure all of you would have answered.
But remember,
In this class, I have grown accustomed to delivering my recitations to approval and applause.
And suddenly, the prospect of uttering so commonplace and ordinary a statement as, I forgot it at home, seemed insufferable to me.
And on the spot, my imagination took flight like a Cretan gun.
And I concocted a story which went something like this.
I said, on my way to school this morning, I saw a ragged old man sitting in the gutter.
I stopped and asked the old gentleman what was wrong.
He told me he was very hungry because he had not eaten in two days.
I realized then the only Christian and humane thing for me to do, particularly since my father's the priest, was to give the old man my lunch, which I did.
I am told that small, furtive lie to impress my teacher, and she was impressed beyond my wildest expectations.
She had large dark eyes and I remember in that instant they swelled open till they resembled great bursting cups.
She sent one of my classmates for the principal.
When the principal returned, my teacher called the class to attention.
Class, please stop eating your lunches.
We have all heard Harry read his good stories to us.
Today, he has a true experience to share with us, something that befell him on his way to school.
I want you all to listen very carefully and to take this experience as a model of conduct for you in your own daily lives.
She turned to me and she said, Harry, repeat that experience again.
Now, I had told a small, quick, sneaky,
But suddenly, with the whole class watching and waiting, with the principal standing there, with Olga wondering what I had done, I could not repeat a small, fertile line.
True to my heroic and Homeric background, I had to make it an epic life.
Now,
I spoke of the scuffed and shabby tips of the old man's shoes.
I spoke of his patched and faded trousers looking as if they had been washed many times.
I spoke of the way I knew he was telling me the truth.
He wasn't lying to me.
How did I know?
I said, his fingers trembled with weakness from hunger as he took the bag of lunch from my hands.
I spoke of the tears of gratitude
glistening in the corners of his eyes, and finally I told him how his voice quavered at the end when he thanked me by saying, God bless you, my son.
This is the way I did it, so powerfully, so dramatic, so full of fur and passion.
When I finished, the principal slapped my shoulder, shook my hand, and said, I will never forget his words.
Olga had two great tears running down her lovely cheeks.
And the class was so awed at what I had done, they neglected to applaud.
And I returned now to my seat.
Just before I reached it, it was visited by a great swarm of my classmates who brought me votive offerings of halves of their own lunches.
So when I reached my death, I found it piled high with the halves of bologna and salami sandwiches, or a new and chocolate chip cookies, apples, oranges, bananas.
and left her seat in the first row, and came walking down the aisle, with the grace of a Trojan princess, to my seat in the rear row, and from her own slender and delicate hands, laid upon my desk, one gold juice.
Now, I sat there,
Enjoying this repast, and if I did not feel I deserved it for my integrity, even then I knew what integrity was.
I must confess to you, a little shamefully, since Father Dean has been a story.
I must confess to you that I did feel I deserved it for the fertility of my imagination.
Now, I am recounting an experience, but I am also storytelling.
And the beauty of storytelling is that as the audience and the storyteller mesh more closely together, the storyteller may stop.
And the audience, then caught up in the tale, will continue to unravel the suspense out of the ground.
But first, you must return with me.
You must suspend belief now and make the leap backward in time with me to that classroom.
You see me there, mundanely you.
with the face of a myopic hawk.
See me taking a bite from half the salami sandwich and putting it down.
Responding to the call of a friend on the right who said, Harry, Harry.
I said, yeah.
He said, Harry, how did you ever think to do such a thing?
I said, I don't know.
It just came over me, I guess.
Somebody from the left, Harry.
I said, yeah.
I said, Harry.
you know you'll be number one in the school from now on.
I know, I know, and I deserve it.
When suddenly
The door of my classroom opened, and who do you think appeared?
She was my mother and I loved her.
And I think for one unbalanced moment, I was even glad to see her.
My mother, it wasn't until she entered my room, it wasn't until the teacher who knew her rose to greet her.
It wasn't until the moment my mother handed the teacher the small brown bag at home.
It wasn't until that dreadful moment that I realized that she was something.
You are a good audience, a responsive one.
We are all bound together by the wealth of a tradition.
And I would like to respond to your generosity in coming to hear me tonight by telling you exactly what took place then.
After all, I am placing great stress upon memory.
Unfortunately, I cannot.
That experience was so horrible, I have plodded it from my mind.
One thing I do remember.
how Olga left her seat in the first row and came walking with the grace of a Trojan princess down the aisle to my seat in the rear row and with her slender and delicate fingers reached down to my desk and took back her peach.
Thank you.
One thing more I remember how for weeks afterwards, wherever I walked in the classrooms, in the corridors, in the schoolyard, I could hear them whispering behind me.
What were they whispering?
They're whispering, there goes Harry.
He's the biggest liar.
So many years ago, I was a boy then.
Now I'm a man.
on the threshold of 60.
And I would like to tell you I have reformed.
I am still an incredible liar.
Give me the kernel of an experience and I will so ornament and embellish it, it will become almost unrecognizable in the telling.
Fortunately, my choice of profession
allows me to conceal to some degree this aberration.
A writer is, among other things, a professional liar.
Memories, nostalgia for the memories, imagination, laughter, not merely the capacity to laugh at others which we
to be able to laugh at ourselves and at our own infernities.
What is another important quality for the writer, important quality for you beings?
That is simply compassion.
By compassion I don't mean pity.
I don't mean a patronizing emotion we sometimes feel for those who are not as fortunate as we are.
I mean compassion as an awareness that we are all mortal, that we are all flawed creatures.
Yet, when we look at them, when we examine the flaws, we see they often bear their own validity.
Society condemns the prostitute, the harlot, but the writer who seeks to understand must come to recognize there are pines, perhaps, when a wanton woman could be a friend of all this.
Society mocks the coward.
What good is a coward?
He is the exact opposite of what we have come to venerate in a Clint Eastwood and James Bond movie.
But the coward knows what it is to be frightened.
Because of that, he may be able to condemn others who are inferior.
Society mocks the fool.
The fool.
What good is a fool?
But the fool may be able to overcome the suspicion of wiser men and women.
give food to someone who is truly hungry, or the wiser person will say they're trying to deceive the enemy.
Now a twin of compassion is simply the tragic sense.
This is a difficult thing in a way to grasp.
It is something we all to one extent or another feel.
and yet difficult at times to articulate.
And the tragic sense is merely that awareness, that death is a perimeter around all our lives, that the sun rises in the morning and the sun sets in light.
And in the space of that day, we have grown a day longer.
The cycle carries through the relentless
As children standing under a light sky full of stars, we quiver with expectation.
We wait the ascent of the sun we feel will shine in us forever.
As we grow older, involved in the turmoil of living, we come to experience death, illness, suffering, suffering.
But even as we watch those we love grow ill, sometimes die,
The living of life allows us to begin to discern the pattern that exists in the cycle of the seasons, the present, the past, and the future, the living, the dead, and the unborn.
From the tug of wind to the fall of a raindrop, the flutter of a moth's wings, we move across eternity to the stunning image of Jupiter brought back by the cameras in the satellite.
We sense in some way the linkage of these things without being able to define other poets and philosophers of trauma.
We who cannot see the thousand subtle bonds by chance, they are there.
With that inner vision which comes to us through the living of our lives, we begin to sense that subtle connection of all things.
That is the tragic sense, that tragic awareness.
So even as we grieve for others who pass on ourselves, we hear the laughter of our children, the whisper of young lovers, and the joy and clamor of celebrations.
We applaud the vision of the artist's art, of the poet's poet.
With that battered understanding which comes to Paul, we begin to recognize the truth of St.
Paul's utterance, who asks us to beareth all things, to holdeth all things, to believeth all things, and to endureth all things.
I speak, as I have said,
in so many places.
And I counted a great good fortune.
Because in the speaking, I owe many of the things I think we feel in our lives.
I feel that in speaking, I am given the opportunity to articulate many things that we feel in the loneliness of our own problems.
As children remember how we would wake in our father and mother's houses, cloistered and protected.
They and sisters and brothers who slept in rooms and around our own.
Some or others, they secured our lives.
They acted as sentries around us in the darkness.
How different it is for us not.
I wait now in my house beside my wife, father and mother dead, sisters and brothers of the way, sons of Rome and God from our house.
I lie there and find it difficult to fall back soon, thinking of all that mass of things all of us face in our lives.
unfulfilled contracts and unnamed goals and the difficulty of relationships that exist on ours.
And I think then, if one wishes to understand the difference between the night that we experienced as children and nights that we experienced as adults in the maturity of our lives,
I am now, I said, on the threshold of 60.
Now that is not old, but it is certainly no longer gone.
I am the writer of 10 books.
I have some written articles and stories.
I have been puzzled to one woman.
I do not say that as a lament, but to say that at least in that way I am more successful than Norman Mailer at Salt Lake.
I have looked into the faces of many men.
I have heard the foolishness they spoke.
I have uttered many possibilities myself.
I have learned much, forgotten much.
I've also learned that we are not all destined regardless of what we anticipate as children.
We are not all destined in our lives.